Provide normative guidance on function/option/option value impl. (#925)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/registry.md

# MessageFormat 2.0 Default Function Registry

This section defines the **standard** _functions_ which are REQUIRED for conformance with this specification,
along with **optional** _functions_ that SHOULD be implemented to support
additional functionality.

Implementations MUST define and support each **standard** _function_ and

> MUST accept all _options_ and _option_ values defined as **standard** listed in this specification.

Reviewer: We ought to define somewhere what "accept" means.

Are there some conditions where an implementation could emit an error and use a fallback value for a placeholder which uses any set of options that it "MUST accept", or is it required that any perceived errors or unsupported values are silently ignored?

Author: To me, "accept" means that no error should be emitted just because a given function/option/option value appears in a placeholder. We say "accept" to avoid requiring that any given behavior attach to the f/o/v in question. However, it probably should work in some meaningful, recognizable manner.

Author: Done. See changes.

When defined and supported by an implementation, each **optional** _function_ 
MUST accept all _options_ and _option_ values listed as **standard** in this specification.

Implementations SHOULD implement _options_ and _option_ values that are marked as **optional**.

Implementations MAY implement _functions_ not defined in this specification.

> Such functions MUST use an implementation-defined _namespace_.

Reviewer: A "MUST" here would make it impossible for an implementation to update a part of the core function set when it changes.

For example, a later LDML release could add some minor option to an existing formatter, and at the same time introduce a new `:list` formatter. If the implementation cannot immediately provide a `:list` formatter, it could not add the minor option either if there's no flexibility on non-namespaced function and option names.

Also, we can't really test for this.

```suggestion
Such functions SHOULD use an implementation-defined _namespace_.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm having trouble understanding your reasoning. It seems to be something like:

- My implementation adds :foo:list with option backwards=
- LDML 50 introduces a :list formatter with different options.
- My implementation can't conformantly upgrade to LDML 50 by aliasing :list to my :foo:list order to add the :list formatter, because backwards= is not standard and doesn't have a namespace.

Is that the scenario you have in mind? I just can't make out what it is.

Reviewer 2: Ok, I understand what you mean now.

NOTE I think in the future we probably want to introduce any new functions/options/option values as _optional_ in their first release, and only make them _required_ in a subsequent release. That does not solve the problem you raise, but reduces the frequency of occurrence.

The downside of your approach is that it opens the door to collisions, and functions that are 'pretending' to be standard but aren't. I would rather see an **explicit** carve-out for that case.

```suggestion
Such functions MUST use an implementation-defined _namespace_. 

There is one exception to this policy, where the function is conformant to a later version of LDML. For example, suppose LDML 50 adds a `:list` function; in that case, an implementation that is conformant to LDML 49 can add that `:list` function and its options, while remaining conformant to LDML 49. 
```
I'll make the similar suggestion below, for options.

Author: I get it, but recall that we're going to break the functions apart into separate specs (according to our design doc). I can get behind SHOULD here to avoid versioning issues, but perhaps we could still say something like:

```suggestion
Functions not defined by any version of this specification MUST use an implementation-defined _namespace_.
```

This is still untestable, of course.

Reviewer 2: Much pithier than my suggestion!

>This is still untestable, of course.

Right, it isn't _mechanically_ testable, but it is testable (in a broader sense) by inspection of implementation's documentation of what it accepts for functions, options, and option values.

Author: > Much pithier than my suggestion!

Earned my paycheck today. 😉

Author: I think I'll commit this one. I'm curious to hear @eemeli's opinion on options, tho... This formulation *could* apply there too.

> In addition, implementations are encouraged to provide mechanisms for users to
> register and use user-defined _functions_ and their associated _functional handlers_.

Reviewer: "are encouraged to" feels a bit too vague.

```suggestion
In addition, implementations SHOULD provide mechanisms for users to
register and use user-defined _functions_ and their associated _functional handlers_.
```

Reviewer 2: SHOULD is probably ok.

Implementations MAY implement additional _options_ not defined here.  

> Such _options_ MUST use an implementation-specific _namespace_.

Reviewer: Again, I think this is too strong and limiting.

```suggestion
Such _options_ SHOULD use an implementation-specific _namespace_.
```

Reviewer 2: as above

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Such options MUST use an implementation-defined _namespace_. 

There is one exception to this policy, where the option is conformant to a later version of LDML. For example, suppose LDML 50 adds a `medium` option to `:number compactDisplay`; in that case, an implementation that is conformant to LDML 49 can add that `medium` option while remaining conformant to LDML 49. 
```

Implementations MAY implement additional _option_ values for _options_ defined here,
although care needs to be exercised to ensure interoperability
and to avoid collisions with future standardization.
There is no namespace mechanism for _option_ values,
however, the [stability policy](#stability-policy) for this specification 

> permits only the ranges a-z, A-Z, and 0-9 in _option_ values.

Reviewer: This is not the case. The stability policy only says this:
> Updates to this specification will only reserve, define, or require function names or function option names consisting of characters in the ranges a-z, A-Z, and 0-9. All other names in these categories are reserved for the use of implementations or users.

Reviewer 2: Right, that is for function names and option names, not option values. I have a suggestion below.

> There is no namespace mechanism for _option_ values,
> however, the [stability policy](#stability-policy) for this specification 
> permits only the ranges a-z, A-Z, and 0-9 in _option_ values.
> Implementation-defined values SHOULD use a distinguishing character 
> or character sequence, such as by prefixing with a `_` U+005F LOW LINE,
> to ensure that they don't collide with future standardization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is no namespace mechanism for _option_ values.
Implementation-defined _enum_ values SHOULD use a distinguishing character 
or character sequence, such as by prefixing with a `_` U+005F LOW LINE,
to ensure that they don't collide with future standardization.

For example, the option `compactDisplay` for `:currency` has option values `short` and `long`.
If an implementation adds a medium value, it should be distinguished, eg `_medium`.
```

Reviewer: Why not recommend that these be `foo:` namespaced? As in, `compactDisplay=icu:medium`.

Reviewer 2: I didn't think that we had namespaced option **values**.

Author: We don't have namespaces option values and the ABNF does not permit a colon in the unquoted value (there can be one in a literal, but the literal has to be quoted to have a colon).

Author: > Implementation-defined _enum_ values

`enum` isn't a defined term. I get that you're trying to avoid making people put underscores on values such as our digit option value or other normal data serializations.

Reviewer 2: Maybe that could be omitted, or rephrased as something like:

Implementation-defined values that represent an enumeration of values such as {`short`, `medium`, `long`} SHOULD use a distinguishing character

Reviewer: > We don't have namespaces option values and the ABNF does not permit a colon in the unquoted value (there can be one in a literal, but the literal has to be quoted to have a colon).

Oh, true. Then recommending a `_` prefix is probably a good idea.

# MessageFormat 2.0 Default Function Registry

This section defines the **standard** _functions_ which are REQUIRED for conformance with this specification,
along with **optional** _functions_ that SHOULD be implemented to support
additional functionality.

To **_<dfn>accept</dfn>_** a function means that an implementation MUST NOT
emit an _Unknown Function_ error for that _function_'s _identifier_.

> To _accept_ an option means that an implementation MUST NOT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To _accept_ an option means that a _function handler_ MUST NOT
```

emit a _Bad Option_ error for that _option_'s _identifier_ when used with the _function_
it is defined for
and MUST NOT emit a _Bad Option_ error for any of the _option_ values
(both **standard** and **optional**)
defined for that _option_.

> Accepting a _function_ or its _options_ does not mean that any given output is produced.

Author: No output is one possibility I entertained!

_Functions_ can define _options_. 
An _option_ can be **standard** or **optional**.

Implementations MUST _accept_ each **standard** _function_ and
MUST _accept_ all _options_ and _option_ values defined as **standard** for those _functions_.

Implementations SHOULD _accept_ each **optional** _function_. 
For each such _function_, the implementation MUST accept all _options_ and _option_ values 
listed as **standard** for that _function_.

Implementations SHOULD _accept_ _options_ and _option_ values that are marked as **optional**.

Implementations MAY _accept_ _functions_ not defined in this specification.
Functions not defined by any version of this specification MUST use an implementation-defined _namespace_.
In addition, implementations SHOULD provide mechanisms for users to

> register and use user-defined _functions_ and their associated _functional handlers_.

Reviewer: Would this not mean that any user-defined function "MUST use an implementation-defined _namespace_"? That seems rather arbitrary.

I do not think that we ought to place any such restrictions on user-defined functions.

Author: So... SHOULD use an implementation defined namespace, right?

Reviewer: That's weird too; the namespace used by a user-defined function should be entirely user-definable, and we should continue to allow for user functions using no namespace at all.

Author: > Functions not defined by any version of this specification SHOULD use an implementation-defined or user-defined _namespace_.

Does that fix it? (I added _or user-defined_)

I agree with you that impls/users can do whatever they want, but we should provide guidance not to use un-namespaced functions that we don't define.

Author: (mutated the text: have a look)

> Implementations MAY implement additional _options_ not defined here.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementations MAY implement additional _options_ not defined here
for **standard** and **optional** functions.
```

Author: Not sure why this change is needed?

Reviewer: This is meant to make it clearer that the additional options this is talking about are the ones definable on the core functions, rather than _all_ functions. The important context here is the next line, which requires the options to use a namespace. Without the limitation I propose, this could be read as requiring implementations to namespace all the options they add on all functions, even implementation-defined namespaced functions.

Author: I don't see that, but I'm happy to make the change.

Such _options_ MUST use an implementation-specific _namespace_.

Implementations MAY _accept_ additional _option_ values for _options_ defined here,
although care needs to be exercised to ensure interoperability
and to avoid collisions with future standardization.
There is no namespace mechanism for _option_ values,

> however, the [stability policy](#stability-policy) for this specification 

Reviewer 2: I don't see that the stability policy that this points to only allows a-z, A-Z, and 0-9 in option values. Does that mean we couldn't have a _standard_ future function option that took fairly liberal string options like prefex=|β/γ| ?

Author: The stability policy says specifically:

> Updates to this specification will only reserve, define, or require function names or function option names consisting of characters in the ranges a-z, A-Z, and 0-9. All other names in these categories are reserved for the use of implementations or users.

String options *can* include wide ranging literals. This is meant to restrict enumerated keywords. Note too that the restriction is to option/function names, not values. We should probably consider amending this policy in an appropriate way. I will add an issue and agenda item to that effect.

Reviewer: For clarity, we should probably update the stability policy text to refer to "identifiers" rather than "names" in that phrase.

permits only the ranges a-z, A-Z, and 0-9 in _option_ values.
Implementation-defined values SHOULD use a distinguishing character 
or character sequence, such as by prefixing with a `_` U+005F LOW LINE,

> to ensure that they don't collide with future standardization.

Reviewer: If this is desirable, then we should update the stability policy to ensure that future standardization won't be able to use a `_` in option values.

Author: Agreed. I will make a PR for that.

Reviewer: See #929.

# MessageFormat 2.0 Default Function Registry

This section defines the **standard** _functions_ which are REQUIRED for conformance with this specification,
along with **optional** _functions_ that SHOULD be implemented to support
additional functionality.

To **_<dfn>accept</dfn>_** a function means that an implementation MUST NOT
emit an _Unknown Function_ error for that _function_'s _identifier_.
To _accept_ an option means that a _function handler_ MUST NOT
emit a _Bad Option_ error for that _option_'s _identifier_ when used with the _function_
it is defined for
and MUST NOT emit a _Bad Option_ error for any of the _option_ values

> (both **standard** and **optional**)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

defined for that _option_.
Accepting a _function_ or its _options_ does not mean that a particular output is produced.
Implementations MAY emit an _Unsupported Operation_ error for _options_
or _option_ values that they cannot support.

_Functions_ can define _options_. 
An _option_ can be **standard** or **optional**.

Implementations MUST _accept_ each **standard** _function_ and

> MUST _accept_ all _options_ and _option_ values defined as **standard** for those _functions_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MUST _accept_ all _options_ defined as **standard** for those _functions_.
```

Author: I'm nervous about this one, although I agree with your argument about standard/options for values. However, the requirement is meant to be that you cannot emit _Bad Option_ for a valid option value, e.g.:

```
.input {$n number maximumFractionDigits=2}
```

But you may do so for misspellings or otherwise bad values:

```
.input {$n :number maximumFActionDigit=2.5}
```

Reviewer: We still allow emitting Bad Option for `2.5`, though? That's covered by the definition above:
> To _accept_ an _option_ means that a _function handler_ MUST NOT emit a _Bad Option_ error for that _option_'s _identifier_ when used with the _function_ it is defined for and MUST NOT emit a _Bad Option_ error for any of the _option_ values defined for that _option_.

Note that the final requirement only applies "for any of the _option_ values defined for that _option_", and `2.5` is not a valid _digit size option_ value.

Implementations SHOULD _accept_ each **optional** _function_. 

> For each such _function_, the implementation MUST accept all _options_ and _option_ values 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each such _function_, the implementation MUST accept all _options_
```

listed as **standard** for that _function_.

> Implementations SHOULD _accept_ _options_ and _option_ values that are marked as **optional**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementations SHOULD _accept_ _options_ that are marked as **optional**.
```

Implementations MAY _accept_ _functions_ not defined in this specification.
In addition, implementations SHOULD provide mechanisms for users to
register and use user-defined _functions_ and their associated _functional handlers_.
Functions not defined by any version of this specification SHOULD use 
an implementation-defined or user-defined _namespace_.

> Implementations MAY implement additional _options_ not defined here

Reviewer: Should match the text in the preceding paragraph about functions.

```suggestion
Implementations MAY implement additional _options_ not defined
by any version of this specification
```
